(Same as Bioengineering M153, Electrical and Computer Engineering M153, and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M183B.) Lecture, three hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, five hours. Chemistry 20A, Physics 1A, 1B, 1C, 4AL, 4BL. Introduction to general manufacturing methods, mechanisms, constrains, and microfabrication and nanofabrication. Focus on concepts, physics, and instruments of various microfabrication and nanofabrication techniques that have been broadly applied in industry and academia, including various photolithography technologies, physical and chemical deposition methods, and physical and chemical etching methods. Hands-on experience for fabricating microstructures and nanostructures in modern cleanroom environment. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 107. Introduction to advanced process control. Topics include (1) Lyapunov stability for autonomous nonlinear systems including converse theorems, (2) input to state stability, interconnected systems, and small gain theorems, (3) design of nonlinear and robust controllers for various classes of nonlinear systems, (4) model predictive control of linear and nonlinear systems, (5) advanced methods for tuning of classical controllers, and (6) introduction to control of distributed parameter systems. Concurrently scheduled with course C135. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 210, C216. Chemical vapor deposition is widely used to deposit thin films that comprise microelectronic devices. Topics include reactor design, transport phenomena, gas and surface chemical kinetics, structure and composition of deposited films, and relationship between process conditions and film properties. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course 101C. Technology of particle/gas systems with applications to gas cleaning, commercial production of fine particles, and catalysis. Particle transport and deposition, optical properties, experimental methods, dynamics and control of particle formation processes. Concurrently scheduled with course C140. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisites: Mathematics 33A, 33B. Enforced corequisite: course 109. Introduction to analysis of fluid flow in chemical, biological, materials, and molecular processes. Fundamentals of momentum transport, Newton law of viscosity, mass and momentum conservation in laminar flow, Navier/Stokes equations, and engineering analysis of flow systems. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 101A. Introduction to analysis of heat transfer in chemical, biological, materials, and molecular processes. Fundamentals of thermal energy transport, molecular-level heat transfer in gases, liquids, and solids, forced and free convection, radiation, and engineering analysis of heat transfer in process systems. Letter grading.
Lecture, two hours; laboratory, six hours; outside study, four hours. Enforced requisite: course 100. Enforced corequisite: course 101B. Recommended: course 102B. Investigation of basic transport phenomena in 10 predetermined experiments, collection of data for statistical analysis and individually written technical reports and group presentations. Design and performance of one original experimental study involving transport, separation, or another aspect of chemical and biomolecular engineering. Basic statistics: mean, standard deviation, confidence limits, comparison of two means and of multiple means, single and multiple variable linear regression, and brief introduction to factorial design of experiments. Oral and poster presentations. Technical writing of sections of technical reports and their contents; writing clearly, concisely, and consistently; importance of word choices and punctuation in multicultural engineering environment and of following required formatting. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: Electrical Engineering 236A, 236B. Review of functional analysis concepts. Convexity, convergence, continuity. Minimum distance problems for Hilbert and Banach spaces. Lagrange multiplier theorem in Banach spaces. Nonlinear duality theory. Letter grading.
(Same as Electrical and Computer Engineering M240C and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M270C.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 240B or Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 270B. Applications of variational methods, Pontryagin maximum principle, Hamilton/Jacobi/Bellman equation (dynamic programming) to optimal control of dynamic systems modeled by nonlinear ordinary differential equations. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: course CM245, Life Sciences 1, 2, 3, 4, 23L, Mathematics 31A, 31B, 32A, 33B. Systems approach to intracellular network identification and analysis. Transcriptional regulatory networks, protein networks, and metabolic networks. Data from genome sequencing, large-scale expression analysis, and other high-throughput techniques provide bases for systems identification and analysis. Discussion of gene-metabolic network synthesis. Letter grading.
(Same as Bioengineering CM245.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Selected topics in molecular biology that form foundation of biotechnology and biomedical industry today. Topics include recombinant DNA technology, molecular research tools, manipulation of gene expression, directed mutagenesis and protein engineering, DNA-based diagnostics and DNA microarrays, antibody and protein-based diagnostics, genomics and bioinformatics, isolation of human genes, gene therapy, and tissue engineering. Concurrently scheduled with course CM145. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 108B. Application of optimization methods in chemical process design; computer aids in process engineering; process modeling; systematic flowsheet invention; process synthesis; optimal design and operation of large-scale chemical processing systems. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours. Recommended preparation: multivariable calculus. Review of functional analysis concepts. Vector spaces, norms, convexity, convergence, continuity, Banach/Hilbert/Sobolev spaces. Linear functionals. Orthonormal sets, linear operators and their spectrum. Minimum distance problems, least squares. Lagrange multipliers, nonlinear duality, variational methods. Finite difference and finite element approximation of partial differential equations (PDEs). Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 102A. Principles of non-Newtonian fluid mechanics. Stress constitutive equations. Rheology of polymeric liquids and dispersed systems. Applications in viscometry, polymer processing, biorheology, oil recovery, and drag reduction. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; laboratory, eight hours. Fundamentals in transport phenomena, chemical reaction kinetics, and thermodynamics at molecular level. Topics include Boltzmann equation, microscopic chemical kinetics, transition state theory, and statistical analysis. Examination of engineering applications related to state-of-art research areas in chemical engineering. Letter grading.
Laboratory, nine hours; outside study, nine hours. Limited to graduate chemical engineering students in M.S. semiconductor manufacturing option. Supervised research in processing semiconductor materials and devices. Letter grading.
(Same as Electrical and Computer Engineering M240A and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M270A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 141 or Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 171A. State-space description of linear time-invariant (LTI) and time-varying (LTV) systems in continuous and discrete time. Linear algebra concepts such as eigenvalues and eigenvectors, singular values, Cayley/Hamilton theorem, Jordan form; solution of state equations; stability, controllability, observability, realizability, and minimality. Stabilization design via state feedback and observers; separation principle. Connections with transfer function techniques. Letter grading.
(Same as Electrical and Computer Engineering M242A and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M272A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M280A or Electrical and Computer Engineering M240A or Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M270A. State-space techniques for studying solutions of time-invariant and time-varying nonlinear dynamic systems with emphasis on stability. Lyapunov theory (including converse theorems), invariance, center manifold theorem, input-to-state stability and small-gain theorem. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses M280A, M282A. Designed for graduate students. Introduction to advanced dynamical analysis and controller synthesis methods for nonlinear infinite dimensional systems. Topics include (1) linear operator and stability theory (basic results on Banach and Hilbert spaces, semigroup theory, convergence theory in function spaces), (2) nonlinear model reduction (linear and nonlinear Galerkin method, proper orthogonal decomposition), (3) nonlinear and robust control of nonlinear hyperbolic and parabolic partial differential equations (PDEs), (4) applications to transport-reaction processes. Letter grading.
Seminar, to be arranged. Requisites for each offering announced in advance by department. Advanced and current study of one or more aspects of chemical engineering, such as chemical process dynamics and control, fuel cells and batteries, membrane transport, advanced chemical engineering analysis, polymers, optimization in chemical process design. May be repeated for credit with topic change. Letter grading.
(Same as Electrical and Computer Engineering M248S and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M299A.) Seminar, two hours; outside study, six hours. Limited to graduate engineering students. Presentations of research topics by leading academic researchers from fields of systems, dynamics, and control. Students who work in these fields present their papers and results. S/U grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for graduate chemistry or engineering students. Application of chemistry, physics, and engineering principles to design and operation of plasma and ion-beam reactors used in etching, deposition, oxidation, and cleaning of materials. Examination of atomic, molecular, and ionic phenomena involved in plasma and ion-beam processing of semiconductors, etc. Letter grading.
Lecture, one hour. Requisite: Life Sciences 3. Integration of science and business in biotechnology. Academic research leading to licensing and founding of companies that turn research breakthroughs into marketable products. Invited lecturers from academia and industry cover emerging areas of biotechnology from combination of science, engineering, and business points of view. S/U or letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 106, 200, or Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering C132A. Fundamentals: change equations for multicomponent reactive mixtures, rate laws. Applications: combustion, including burning of (1) premixed gases or (2) condensed fuels. Detonation. Sound absorption and dispersion. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 106 or 110. Analysis and design of molecular-beam systems. Molecular-beam sampling of reactive mixtures in combustion chambers or gas jets. Molecular-beam studies of gas-surface interactions, including energy accommodations and heterogeneous reactions. Applications to air pollution control and to catalysis. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: Chemistry 20A. Electronic, physical, and chemical properties of hydrogen. Various methods of production, including production through methane steam reforming, electrolysis, and thermochemical cycles. Description in depth of several uses of hydrogen, including hydrogen combustion and hydrogen fuel cells. Concurrently scheduled with course C128. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 106, 200. Macroscopic descriptions: reaction rates, relaxation times, thermodynamic correlations of reaction rate constants. Molecular descriptions: kinetic theory of gases, models of elementary processes. Applications: absorption and dispersion measurements, unimolecular reactions, photochemical reactions, hydrocarbon pyrolysis and oxidation, explosions, polymerization. Letter grading.
(Same as Bioengineering M225.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced corequisite: course 101C. Separation strategies, unit operations, and economic factors used to design processes for isolating and purifying materials like whole cells, enzymes, food additives, or pharmaceuticals that are products of biological reactors. Concurrently scheduled with course C125. Letter grading.
(Same as Chemistry CM227.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: Chemistry 153A. Engineering microorganisms for complex phenotype is common goal of metabolic engineering and synthetic biology. Production of advanced biofuels involves designing and constructing novel metabolic networks in cells. Such efforts require profound understanding of biochemistry, protein structure, and biological regulations and are aided by tools in bioinformatics, systems biology, and molecular biology. Fundamentals of metabolic biochemistry, protein structure and function, and bioinformatics. Use of systems modeling for metabolic networks to design microorganisms for energy applications. Concurrently scheduled with course CM127. S/U or letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: Chemistry 113A. Introduction to surfaces and interfaces of engineering materials, particularly catalytic surface and thin films for solid-state electronic devices. Topics include classification of crystals and surfaces, analysis of structure and composition of crystals and their surfaces and interfaces. Examination of engineering applications, including catalytic surfaces, interfaces in microelectronics, and solid-state laser. May be concurrently scheduled with course C116. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Introduction to surfaces and interfaces of engineering materials, particularly catalytic surface and thin films for solid-state electronic devices. Topics include classification of crystals and surfaces, analysis of structure and composition of crystals and their surfaces and interfaces. Examination of engineering applications, including catalytic surfaces, interfaces in microelectronics, and solid-state laser. May be concurrently scheduled with course C116. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course C114. Transport phenomena in electrochemical systems; relationships between molecular transport, convection, and electrode kinetics, along with applications to industrial electrochemistry, fuel cell design, and modern battery technology. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; preparation, two hours; outside study, five hours. Recommended requisites: courses 101C, 102B. Pollutant sources, estimation of source releases, waste minimization, transport and fate of chemical pollutants in environment, intermedia transfers of pollutants, multimedia modeling of chemical partitioning in environment, exposure assessment and fundamentals of risk assessment, risk reduction strategies. Concurrently scheduled with course C118. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 108A. Systematic methods for design of environment-friendly processes. Development of methods at molecular, unit-operation, and network levels. Synthesis of mass exchange, heat exchange, and reactor networks. Concurrently scheduled with course C119. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 101C. Advanced treatment of mass transfer, with applications to industrial separation processes, gas cleaning, pulmonary bioengineering, controlled release systems, and reactor design; molecular and constitutive theories of diffusion, interfacial transport, membrane transport, convective mass transfer, concentration boundary layers, turbulent transport. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisites: courses 101A, 101C, 103. Fundamentals of membrane science and technology, with emphasis on separations at micro, nano, and molecular/angstrom scale with membranes. Relationship between structure/morphology of dense and porous membranes and their separation characteristics. Use of nanotechnology for design of selective membranes and models of membrane transport (flux and selectivity). Examples provided from various fields/applications, including biotechnology, microelectronics, chemical processes, sensors, and biomedical devices. Concurrently scheduled with course C121. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Introduction, definition, rationale of stochastic processes. Distribution, moments, correlation. Mean square calculus. Wiener process, white noise, Poisson process. Generalized functions. Linear systems with stochastic inputs, ergodicity. Application to chemical process modeling and simulation. Markov chains and processes. Ito integrals, stochastic difference, and differential equations. S/U or Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 222A. Introduction to linear and nonlinear systems theory and estimation theory. Prediction, Kalman filter, smoothing of discrete and continuous systems. Stochastic control, systems with multiplicative noise. Applications to control of chemical processes. Stochastic optimization, stochastic linear and dynamic programming. S/U or Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Limited to graduate chemical engineering, materials science and engineering, or Master of Engineering program students. Design of products for meeting environmental objectives; lifecycle inventories; lifecycle impact assessment; design for energy efficiency; design for waste minimization, computer-aided design tools, materials selection methods. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: Life Sciences 2, 3, 23L. Introduction to design and synthesis of biomaterials for regenerative medicine, in vitro cell culture, and drug delivery. Biological principles of cellular microenvironment and design of extracellular matrix analogs using biological and engineering principles. Biomaterials for growth factor, and DNA and siRNA delivery as therapeutics and to facilitate tissue regeneration. Use of stem cells in tissue engineering. Concurrently scheduled with course C124. Letter grading.
Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Special topics in chemical engineering for undergraduate students taught on experimental or temporary basis, such as those taught by resident and visiting faculty members. May be repeated once for credit with topic or instructor change. Letter grading.
Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for undergraduate students who are part of research group. Discussion of research methods and current literature in field. May be repeated for credit. Letter grading.
Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to juniors/seniors. Supervised individual research or investigation of selected topic under guidance of faculty mentor. Culminating paper or project required.May be repeated for credit with school approval. Individual contract required; enrollment petitions available in Office of Academic and Student Affairs. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 102B. Phenomenological and statistical thermodynamics of chemical and physical systems with engineering applications. Presentation of role of atomic and molecular spectra and intermolecular forces in interpretation of thermodynamic properties of gases, liquids, solids, and plasmas. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 200 or Chemistry C223A or Physics 215A. Modern simulation techniques for classical molecular systems. Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics in various ensembles. Applications to liquids, solids, and polymers. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 101C, 106. Principles of chemical reactor analysis and design. Particular emphasis on simultaneous effects of chemical reaction and mass transfer on noncatalytic and catalytic reactions in fixed and fluidized beds. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Fundamentals of cryogenics and cryoengineering science pertaining to industrial low-temperature processes. Basic approaches to analysis of cryofluids and envelopes needed for operation of cryogenic systems; low-temperature behavior of matter, optimization of cryosystems and other special conditions. Concurrently scheduled with course C111. Letter grading.
Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: course 101A, Chemistry 30A. Formation of polymers, criteria for selecting reaction scheme, polymerization techniques, polymer characterization. Mechanical properties. Rheology of macromolecules, polymer process engineering. Diffusion in polymeric systems. Polymers in biomedical applications and in microelectronics. Concurrently scheduled with course C112. Letter grading.
(Formerly numbered C214.) (Same as Materials Science CM263.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: courses 102B, Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 105A (or Materials Science 130). Fundamentals of electrochemistry and engineering applications to industrial electrochemical processes. Primary emphasis on fundamental approach to analyze electrochemical processes. Specific topics include electrochemical reactions on metal and semiconductor surfaces, electrodeposition, electroless deposition, electrosynthesis, fuel cells, aqueous and non-aqueous batteries, solid-state electrochemistry. May be concurrently scheduled with course CM114. Letter grading.
(Same as Bioengineering M215.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. requisite: course 101C. Use of previously learned concepts of biophysical chemistry, thermodynamics, transport phenomena, and reaction kinetics to develop tools needed for technical design and economic analysis of biological reactors. May be concurrently scheduled with course C115. Letter grading.